翻译外部模块使用案例 (#1756)
cocos-creator/creator-docs: en/scripting/modules/example.md

# Example: External Module Usage Case

If you don't know how to get npm, please refer to the [How to Get npm Packages](./config.md) documentation.

## ESM and CJS Interaction Rules

The biggest problem with how to use npm in Cocos Creator 3.x is the interaction between ESM and CJS modules. If you don't understand how these two modules are defined in Cocos Creator, check out the [modules](./spec.md) section. In fact, the way ESM and CJS modules interact is described in the [official Node.js documentation](https://nodejs.org/api/esm.html#esm_interoperability_with_commonjs). Briefly summarized as follows:

> - CommonJS modules are exported by ``module.exports``, and when importing CommonJS modules, you can use the default import method for ES modules or their sugar syntax counterparts.

Author: Oh, it should be "syntactic sugar", sorry. You can google it, it's a proper noun.

    a: 1,
    b: 2,
}

module.exports.c = 3;

// test.mjs

// default points to module.exports
import foo from './foo.js'; // equivalent to import { default as foo } from './foo.js'
console.log(JSON.stringify(foo)); // {"a":1, "b":2, "c":3}

// Import all exports of the foo module
import * as module_foo from './foo.js'
console.log(JSON.stringify(module_foo)); // {"c":3, "default":{"a":1, "b":2, "c":3}}

import { a } from './foo.js'
console.log(a); // Error: a is not defined

// According to the third point above, c has a separate export
import { c } from './foo.js'
console.log(c); // 3
```

## npm Module Usage Cases

### Case 1: using protobufjs

First, get the [protobufjs](https://www.npmjs.com/package/protobufjs) package. Open a terminal in the project directory and execute `npm i protobufjs`. If the project is a multi-person collaboration, you can even write the `protobufjs` package to `package.json` as a dependency by adding `npm install --save protobufjs` to the above named line to automatically write it to `package.json` from the command line. Once executed, you will be able to find the `protobufjs` folder in the `node_module` folder under the project directory.

> ![module](./example/module.png)

Reviewer: 这篇文档的图没有上传

Next, you can see it exported in ``index.js``.

```js
"use strict";
module.exports = require("./src/index");
```

Determine the module format and export method. The next step is how to use the `protobufjs` module in the script assets.

First, create a `test.ts` script under `assets`. Then, write the following code in the header of the script.

```ts
// Most npm modules can be used by directly importing the module name.
import protobufjs from 'protobufjs';
console.log(protobufjs);
```

When run in Chrome, the console output is as follows:

![protobufjs-print-default](./example/protobufjs-print-default.png)

Some developers may have received an error when writing `import protobufjs from 'protobufjs'`, indicating that the module `has no default export`. This is because **CJS** does not have `default` export, and **ESM** and **CJS** interact with each other when is treated as `module.exports` **as** `export default` and does not mean that **CJS** modules have true default exports. Therefore, to keep the original way of writing, it is possible to configure TypeScript, see [TypeScript configuration](#TypeScript-configuration).

> Next, you can use all the modules provided by `protobufjs` directly. Of course, if you only need specific submodule functionality, such as `light` and `minimal`, you can import the subpaths directly from the package.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, all the modules provided by `protobufjs` are directly accessible. If only specific submodule functionality is needed, such as `light` and `minimal`, import the subpaths directly from the package:
```

```ts
// Using the light version
import protobuf from 'protobufjs/light.js';
// Using the minimal version
import protobuf from 'protobufjs/minimal.js';
```

> > **Note**: in the case of protobufjs and many classic npm packages, the suffix is required when importing subpaths in the package. Please refer to the [Cocos Creator module specification](./spec.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note**: in the case of `protobufjs` and many classic npm packages, the suffix is required when importing subpaths in the package. Please refer to the [Cocos Creator module specification](./spec.md) documentation.
```

#### TypeScript configuration

> When importing modules without default export in TypeScript, it usually appears that `Module '"/${project_path}/protobufjs"' has no default export.`. This is because currently `protobufjs` only provides CommonJS modules, and Cocos Creator accesses CommonJS modules via "default import", but CommonJS modules really don't have a "default export". In this case, you can set the `"allowSyntheticDefaultImports"` option in the `"compilerOptions"` field to `true` by editing the `tsconfig.json` file in the project directory. If the field is not present, you can fill it in yourself.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When importing modules without default export in TypeScript, it usually appears that `Module '"/${project_path}/protobufjs"' has no default export.`. This is because currently `protobufjs` only provides CommonJS modules, and Cocos Creator accesses CommonJS modules via "default import", but CommonJS modules really don't have a "default export". In this case, set the `"allowSyntheticDefaultImports"` option in the `"compilerOptions"` field to `true` by editing the `tsconfig.json` file in the project directory. If the field is not present, manually fill it in.
```

```json5
{
  /* Base configuration. do not edit this field. */
  "extends": "./temp/tsconfig.cocos.json",

  "compilerOptions": {
      "allowSyntheticDefaultImports": true, // Needs to be turned on
  }
}
```

### Case 2: Compiling a proto file from protobuf into a JavaScript file

> This section is about how to compile a proto file into a JavaScript file. In fact, when looking through the protobufjs documentation, you can see that it provides [command line tools](https://www.npmjs.com/package/protobufjs#command-line) to convert static modules and ts declaration files. This time, let's take an empty 3.0 project, example, as an example to demonstrate the whole process.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This section is about how to compile a proto file into a JavaScript file. In fact, when looking through the `protobufjs` documentation, notice that it provides [command line tools](https://www.npmjs.com/package/protobufjs#command-line) to convert static modules and ts declaration files. This time, let's take an empty 3.0 project, example, as an example to demonstrate the whole process.
```

First, install `protobufjs` via npm and write it to the `package.json` dependency in the project directory.

> Next, create a new Proto directory in the project directory and define a few proto files.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, create a new Proto directory in the project directory and define a few proto files:
```

```proto
// pkg1.proto

package pkg1;
syntax = "proto2";
message Bar {
    required int32 bar = 1;
}

// pkg2.proto

package pkg2;
syntax = "proto2";
message Baz {
	required int32 baz = 1;
}

// unpkg.proto is not part of any package

syntax = "proto2";
message Foo {
    required int32 foo = 1;
}
```

> Next, define it in package.json.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Next, define it in `package.json`:
```

```json
"scripts": {
    "build-proto:pbjs": "pbjs --dependency protobufjs/minimal.js --target static-module --wrap commonjs --out ./Proto.js/proto.js ./Proto/*.proto",
    "build-proto:pbts": "pbts --main --out ./Proto.js/proto.d.ts ./Proto.js/*.js"
},
```

> The first directive `build-proto:pbjs` roughly means to compile the proto file into js. The parameter `--dependency protobufjs/minimal.js` is actually because the execution `require`s to `protobufjs`, but all we need to use is its submodule `minimal.js`. Then, generate the js into the Proto.js folder (note: if you don't have a Proto.js folder, you need to create it manually). The second command `build-proto:pbts` generates the type declaration file based on the output of the first paragraph.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first directive `build-proto:pbjs` roughly means to compile the proto file into js. The parameter `--dependency protobufjs/minimal.js` is actually because the execution `require`s to `protobufjs`, but all we need to use is its submodule `minimal.js`. Then, generate the js into the Proto.js folder.

> **Note**: if a Proto.js folder is not present, manually create it. 

The second command `build-proto:pbts` generates the type declaration file based on the output of the first paragraph.
```

> Following the above steps successfully completes the process of converting the proto file into a js file. Next, the js file can be introduced into the project script under `assets`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following the above steps successfully completes the process of converting the proto file into a JavaScript file. Next, the JavaScript file can be introduced into the project script under `assets`.
```

```ts
import proto from './Proto.js/proto.js';
console.log(proto.pkg1.Bar);
```

Here it is still important to state that if anyone gets an error when importing, indicating that proto is not exported by default, there are two solutions:

- It can be solved by allowing default import fields for modules containing default exports in `tsconfig.json`

    ```json
    "compilerOptions": {
      "allowSyntheticDefaultImports": true,
    }
    ```

- Add the default export

>     Create a Tools/wrap-pbts-result.js file in the project directory with the following script code:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    Create a `Tools/wrap-pbts-result.js` file in the project directory with the following script code:
```

    ```js
    const fs = require('fs');
    const ps = require('path');
    const file = ps.join(__dirname, '...' , 'proto.js', 'proto.d.ts');
    const original = fs.readFileSync(file, { encoding: 'utf8' });
    fs.writeFileSync(file, `
    namespace proto {
        ${original}
    }
    export default proto;
    `);
    ```

    Replace the original ``build-proto:pbts`` command with the following:

    ```json
    "build-proto:pbts": "pbts --main --out ./Proto.js/proto.d.ts ./Proto.js/*.js && node ./Tools/wrap-pbts-result.js"
    ```

Eventually, it will be ready to run directly. For the full project content, please refer to: [npm-case](https://github.com/cocos-creator/example-3d/tree/master/npm-case).

> > **Note**: the packaged js file can be placed in the `assets` directory of the project or elsewhere in the project. The js file in the `assets` directory no longer needs to be checked for export as a plugin, please be aware of that.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note**: the packaged JavaScript file can be placed in the `assets` directory of the project or elsewhere in the project. The js file in the `assets` directory no longer needs to be checked for export as a plugin, please be aware of that.
```

### Case 3: use of lodash-es

> Similar to [Case 1: protobufjs use](# Case 1: protobufjs-use), install the `lodash-es` package. We know that the entry file is `lodash.js`, and the entry file also automatically helps to export all submodules under it in **ESM** module format, and according to `type` it also confirms that it is currently an **ESM** module. Therefore, it is possible to import any module directly. Let's take the `test.ts` script asset under `assets` as an example, and introduce the submodules within `lodash`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Similar to [Case 1: protobufjs use](# Case 1: protobufjs-use), install the `lodash-es` package. The entry file is `lodash.js`, and the entry file also automatically helps to export all submodules under it in **ESM** module format, and according to `type` it also confirms that it is currently an **ESM** module. Therefore, it is possible to import any module directly. Taking the `test.ts` script asset under `assets` as an example, and introduce the submodules within `lodash`:
```

```ts
import { array, add } from 'lodash-es';
```

> At this point, you will find that an error is reported at the code level, but it actually works. This is because there is a clear distinction between JavaScript, which is dynamically typed, and TypeScript, which is statically typed, so there is no way to know the exact type of the exported module when using js scripts, and the best thing to do is to declare a type definition file .d.ts. Fortunately, but when we hover over the error, there is a hint The type declaration file for the `lodash` module can be installed by running `npm i --save-dev @types/lodash-es`. After installation, restart VS Code and you will see that the error message disappears, along with the code hint.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point, notice that an error is reported at the code level, but it actually works. This is because there is a clear distinction between JavaScript, which is dynamically typed, and TypeScript, which is statically typed, this means there is no way to know the exact type of the exported module when using JavaScript, and the best thing to do is to declare a type definition file `.d.ts`. Fortunately, but when hovering over the error, there is a hint `The type declaration file for the ``lodash`` module can be installed by running ``npm i --save-dev @types/lodash-es```. After installation, restart VS Code and notice the error message disappears, along with the code hint.
```

### Case 4: Using web3

> Install the `web3` package in the same way as the `protobufjs` case above. Using the same detection method, determine that `web3` is a **CJS** module. Import in the same way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Install the `web3` package in the same way as the `protobufjs` case above. Using the same detection method, determine that `web3` is a **CJS** module. Import in the same way:
```

```ts
import web3 from 'web3';
```

> When I go back to the editor, I still get a bunch of errors as follows.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When going back to the editor, a bunch of errors are still present:
```

![node-module](./example/node-module.png)

> This is because the package is customized for Node and contains built-in modules from Node.js, which are not available in Creator, resulting in errors. Usually these packages also take care of web users. When we import the package directly, the package entry points directly to the Node version, while the web version is placed in the `dist/**.js` or `dist/**.min.js` file under the package. In this case, you will need to import the custom version of the Web provided in the package as follows

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is because the package is customized for Node and contains built-in modules from Node.js, which are not available in Creator, resulting in errors. Usually, these packages also take care of web users. When importing the package directly, the package entry points directly to the Node version, while the web version is placed in the `dist/**.js` or `dist/**.min.js` file under the package. In this case, it is necessary to import the custom version of the Web provided in the package as follows:
```

```ts
import web3 from 'web3/dist/web3.min.js';
```

> At this point, we find that the editor does not report errors anymore, but the code prompts: `Could not find a declaration file for module 'web3/dist/web3.min.js'. '/${project_path}/node_modules/web3/dist/web3.min.js' implicitly has an 'any' type.`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At this point, the editor does not report errors anymore, but the code prompts: `Could not find a declaration file for module 'web3/dist/web3.min.js'. '/${project_path}/node_modules/web3/dist/web3.min.js' implicitly has an 'any' type.`.
```

> This is because even if these packages have a type specification, it is a type specification for the Node version of that entry. In general, the interface definitions are the same for both versions, so we can just "borrow" the type description from the Node version. Just create an arbitrary new .d.ts to the project and write:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is because even if these packages have a type specification, it is a type specification for the Node version of that entry. In general, the interface definitions are the same for both versions, just "borrow" the type description from the Node version. Just create an arbitrary new `.d.ts` to the project and write:
```

```ts
// Add a type specification for the module "<package name>/dist/**.js"
declare module "<package name>/dist/**.js" {
    export * from "<package name>"; // "Steal" the type description of the main entry
}
```

> > **Note**: does every package you use have to confirm who it's for? Currently it does. This is improving because in the new version of Node, package.json has a nice mechanism added to tell the user which version to use for what case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> **Note**: does every package you use have to confirm who it's for? Currently it does. This is improving because in the new version of Node, package.json has a nice mechanism added to tell the user which version to use for what case.
```

Reviewer 2: I dont understand what this means.

Author: The original text is so informal, I should've have corrected it first.

Reviewer 2: looks good now.

### Special case: firebase usage

> This is a special case, so let's take a look at the special features of this case. After installing the `firebase` package in the way described above, and analyzing the package according to the `package.json` file, we can see that the package is in **CJS** format. Based on the entry file, we can infer that this package is customized for Node (this can be tested according to [Case 4: Using web3](#case-4:-using-web3)), so we have to use the Web custom version `index.esm.js`. The problem is, `index.esm.js` is an **ESM** module, and the Creator recognizes this package as a **CJS** module, but it is also an **ESM** module, which naturally causes errors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a special case, take a look at the special features of this case. After installing the `firebase` package in the way described above, and analyzing the package according to the `package.json` file, notice the package is in **CJS** format. Based on the entry file, infer that this package is customized for Node (this can be tested according to [Case 4: Using web3](#case-4:-using-web3)), so we have to use the Web custom version `index.esm.js`. The problem is, `index.esm.js` is an **ESM** module, and the Creator recognizes this package as a **CJS** module, but it is also an **ESM** module, which naturally causes errors.
```

Following the above steps successfully completes the process of converting the proto file into a JavaScript file. Next, the JavaScript file can be introduced into the project script under `assets`.

```ts
import proto from './Proto.js/proto.js';
console.log(proto.pkg1.Bar);
```

Here it is still important to state that if anyone gets an error when importing, indicating that proto is not exported by default, there are two solutions:

- It can be solved by allowing default import fields for modules containing default exports in `tsconfig.json`

    ```json
    "compilerOptions": {
      "allowSyntheticDefaultImports": true,
    }
    ```

- Add the default export

    Create a `Tools/wrap-pbts-result.js` file in the project directory with the following script code:

    ```js
    const fs = require('fs');
    const ps = require('path');
    const file = ps.join(__dirname, '...' , 'proto.js', 'proto.d.ts');
    const original = fs.readFileSync(file, { encoding: 'utf8' });
    fs.writeFileSync(file, `
    namespace proto {
        ${original}
    }
    export default proto;
    `);
    ```

>     Replace the original ``build-proto:pbts`` command with the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Replace the original `build-proto:pbts` command with the following:
```

    ```json
    "build-proto:pbts": "pbts --main --out ./Proto.js/proto.d.ts ./Proto.js/*.js && node ./Tools/wrap-pbts-result.js"
    ```

Eventually, it will be ready to run directly. For the full project content, please refer to: [npm-case](https://github.com/cocos-creator/example-3d/tree/master/npm-case).

> **Note**: the packaged JavaScript file can be placed in the `assets` directory of the project or elsewhere in the project. The js file in the `assets` directory no longer needs to be checked for export as a plugin, please be aware of that.

### Case 3: use of lodash-es

> Similar to [Case 1: protobufjs use](# Case 1: protobufjs-use), install the `lodash-es` package. The entry file is `lodash.js`, and the entry file also automatically helps to export all submodules under it in **ESM** module format, and according to `type` it also confirms that it is currently an **ESM** module. Therefore, it is possible to import any module directly. Taking the `test.ts` script asset under `assets` as an example, and introduce the submodules within `lodash`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to [Case 1: protobufjs use](#case-1-using-protobufjs), install the `lodash-es` package. The entry file is `lodash.js`, and the entry file also automatically helps to export all submodules under it in **ESM** module format, and according to `type` it also confirms that it is currently an **ESM** module. Therefore, it is possible to import any module directly. Taking the `test.ts` script asset under `assets` as an example, and introduce the submodules within `lodash`:
```

```ts
import { array, add } from 'lodash-es';
```

> At this point, notice that an error is reported at the code level, but it actually works. This is because there is a clear distinction between JavaScript, which is dynamically typed, and TypeScript, which is statically typed, this means there is no way to know the exact type of the exported module when using JavaScript, and the best thing to do is to declare a type definition file `.d.ts`. Fortunately, but when hovering over the error, there is a hint `The type declaration file for the ``lodash`` module can be installed by running ``npm i --save-dev @types/lodash-es```. After installation, restart VS Code and notice the error message disappears, along with the code hint.

Reviewer: 这里的格式有点问题，麻烦核对一下中文版

Author: 解决了

```ts
import web3 from 'web3/dist/web3.min.js';
```

At this point, the editor does not report errors anymore, but the code prompts: `Could not find a declaration file for module 'web3/dist/web3.min.js'. '/${project_path}/node_modules/web3/dist/web3.min.js' implicitly has an 'any' type.`.

This is because even if these packages have a type specification, it is a type specification for the Node version of that entry. In general, the interface definitions are the same for both versions, just "borrow" the type description from the Node version. Just create an arbitrary new `.d.ts` to the project and write:

```ts
// Add a type specification for the module "<package name>/dist/**.js"
declare module "<package name>/dist/**.js" {
    export * from "<package name>"; // "Steal" the type description of the main entry
}
```

> > **Note**: does every package you use have to confirm who it's for? Currently it does. This is improving because in the new version of Node, package.json has a nice mechanism added to tell the user which version to use for what case.

Author: ```suggestion
> **Note**: currently it is necessary to confirm that if a package is customized for Node. But in the new version of Node, package.json has a nice mechanism added to tell the user which version to use for what case.
```

### Special case: firebase usage

> This is a special case, take a look at the special features of this case. After installing the `firebase` package in the way described above, and analyzing the package according to the `package.json` file, notice the package is in **CJS** format. Based on the entry file, infer that this package is customized for Node (this can be tested according to [Case 4: Using web3](#case-4:-using-web3)), so we have to use the Web custom version `index.esm.js`. The problem is, `index.esm.js` is an **ESM** module, and the Creator recognizes this package as a **CJS** module, but it is also an **ESM** module, which naturally causes errors.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is a special case, take a look at the special features of this case. After installing the `firebase` package in the way described above, and analyzing the package according to the `package.json` file, notice the package is in **CJS** format. Based on the entry file, infer that this package is customized for Node (this can be tested according to [Case 4: Using web3](#case-4-using-web3)), so we have to use the Web custom version `index.esm.js`. The problem is, `index.esm.js` is an **ESM** module, and the Creator recognizes this package as a **CJS** module, but it is also an **ESM** module, which naturally causes errors.
```
